New Drug May Help Some Asthmatics, Study Finds
Give this article


By Andrew Pollack
May 21, 2013
3 MIN READ

A new asthma drug being developed by Sanofi and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals may help patients whose condition is not well controlled by existing medicines, according to the results of a small clinical trial released Tuesday.

In the 12-week study, the number of asthma attacks or other outbreaks of symptoms decreased by 87 percent in those getting the drug, dupilumab, compared with those getting a placebo.

Other measures of lung function and disease control also improved, according to the study results, which were published online Tuesday in The New England Journal of Medicine and presented at the annual meeting of the American Thoracic Society in Philadelphia.

Dupilumab blocks the action of interleukin-4 and interleukin-13, two inflammatory chemicals made by the body that are believed to contribute to asthma. Sanofi and Regeneron say there are also preliminary signs dupilumab works against the skin condition atopic dermatitis, suggesting it can be blocking a biological pathway that contributes to multiple allergic conditions.

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

Still, much larger studies, taking at least two or three years, are likely to be needed before the drug could reach the market.

Daily business updates  The latest coverage of business, markets and the economy, sent by email each weekday. Get it sent to your inbox.
A commentary on the asthma study, also published in The New England Journal of Medicine on Tuesday, said it was “too early to tell if this therapy will be of clinical value,” though it was probably “on the right path.”

Dig deeper into the moment.
Special offer: Subscribe for $1 a week.
After two decades of frustration, Regeneron, which is based in Tarrytown, N.Y., has become a major biotechnology company owing to booming sales of Eylea, its drug to treat age-related macular degeneration, an eye disease.

Image
Dr. George D. Yancopoulos is the head of research at Regeneron Pharmaceuticals.
Dr. George D. Yancopoulos is the head of research at Regeneron Pharmaceuticals.
Credit...Reuters

Regeneron shares have roughly quintupled since the beginning of 2012. In trading Tuesday, however, they closed down 1.4 percent, at $259.96.

Editors’ Picks

Gudetama, the Incredible, Miserable Egg

Making the Slopes Fun from Day 1

Curse Words Around the World Have Something in Common (We Swear)
A
